>> OK, Jodi.
So we've been through allergies,
bacteria, nutrients, diet,
stress, hormones.
What is the seventh step?
>> The seventh step isn't
necessarily for everyone.
The seventh step is based on
what your brainwave patterns
are now doing.
So your brainwave
patterns are developed
based on how you're raised.
In a lot of situations, we
learn from our experiences.
So you get a lot of
people who are raised
in beautiful, happy homes.
And they've got a very
balanced way of living,
and they're happy and positive.
And it's not just personality,
they've been raised that way.
And then you've got
situations where
you might have had a child who's
been physically or sexually
abused all of their life.
Now that child has grown up with
fear every day of their life.
And when you have a fear
state as the only way
that they know how to
respond, you take them
out of that stressful
environment by the time
they're 15 or 16
years old, and can you
just expect them to be happy?
If you were to raise
their brain chemicals
and get their serotonin
and dopamine levels up
to normal levels,
they haven't actually
ever learned how to be happy.
Their brainwave patterns have
learned a certain way of being.
And there's no way
of them necessarily
knowing how to change that
because they don't recognize
what it feels like to have
a normal happy environment.
So in cases like that
it's not just children,
it's people who have been raised
in a happy environment, yet
gotten into an
abusive relationship.
They've gone through a
terrible, disastrous marriage
or it PTSD, for instance.
These experiences
that people have
that are so traumatic
that it changes
their brainwave patterns.
Now we need to be
able to find out
what your brainwave patterns
doing and how to balance that.
And we can.
It's retraining the
brainwave patterns.
Well, I tend to not do this
until I've been through all
of the biochemical steps.
And the reason that is is
because if you try and train
brainwave patterns when
someone's biochemistry is still
not right, then what they eat
on a daily basis or their gut
bacteria can then
change what you've
tried to improve in
the brainwave patterns.
So we do it last.
And on the other hand, what I
find is that 90% of patients
are 100% better before you
get to brainwave patterns.
And so that problem
never has to be resolved.
But for that select few that
have been in those environments
where now they don't
know any other way to be.
They're always suffering anxiety
or they are always suffering
depression because
that's their experience,
what we can do with the
technology available--
and this is widely
available in a lot of areas,
especially in the States--
is brainwave retraining.
So neurotherapy is one option.
Mindfulness and meditation.
So people who are in a
situation where they're
able to control their
mindset to some extent
can still access their
brainwave patterns
and improving their
using meditation techniques.
But for some people,
it's too extreme
for them and they have
no idea where to start.
So something like neurotherapy
is a fantastic tool.
And how they start
that is you do
a qEEG, which is a brain scan.
And that measures your
brainwave patterns
for a period of one
to five minutes.
You can get that analyzed in
different parts of your brain.
So there's 24 positions on
your brain that are measured.
And the measurements show
your delta and your theta
and your alpha waves, your beta
waves, your high beta waves.
And what that does is show
us where the brain wave
abnormalities are occurring
and what abnormalities
are happening in that position.
So some people's brains
aren't communicating one side
to the other.
Some people suffer with
anxiety, some people
suffer with anxiety and
hyperactivity of the brain,
so hypervigilance
or destructability,
because they're in
the high beta range.
Beta is our concentration,
alpha is our meditation, theta
and delta should be
produced when we're asleep.
So when you see patients
or children with ADD,
for instance, or
even adults with ADD,
they're producing predominantly
theta and delta while they're
awake.
So we need to be able
to identify which
part of the brain
is doing it first
and then target that
part of the brain
and help encourage them to
get that brainwave pattern out
of that zone and up
into the beta zone.
And for hyperactive or anxious
patients, getting from the high
beta down to the beta
or to the alpha zone.
So being able to
control that, and we
do that with technology
and software available.
>> OK, great.
And what's this technology
and software do?
Is it sound waves, is
it with headphones?
Or how does it all work?
>> It's a lot like learning
to throw a ball at a target.
So it's creating new
motor neuron pathways.
After we see the
results of the qEEG,
we're able to see what part
of the brain is the problem.
We can then hook up
a cap to our head
and send that message
to the computer.
And the computer will
show on the screen
what zone you're in and
where you should be.
Now you can use reward
techniques with some softwares.
So some software
will play a movie,
some software will play
games, like a Pac-Man game
or different reward mechanisms.
And it can be you don't use
anything bar your brain.
And you need to get
your brainwave patterns
into the right zone
and it will make
the movie play or it will
make the Pac-Man move around
or whatever it is that's going
to stimulate a reward for you.
So when you don't get
it in the right zone,
it will stop working.
And that will tell you, OK, I've
got to try a little bit harder.
Funny enough, it only takes
about two sessions for people
to figure out how to
get their brain wave
pattern in that right zone.
And then we use
up to 30 sessions
to make it a permanent change.
So I've had patients,
one particular lady who's
just an incredible
lady, but she was
she went through a
very difficult marriage
and she came out the other
end with severe depression
and anxiety to the point of
not wanting to leave her home.
So for her, she had
become a recluse.
And she was a highly
intelligent woman.
She's very academic, she
had degrees upon degrees.
And she was working
in the health field,
but more in the orthodox
medicine-type field.
And we worked on all of
her biochemistry first.
And we improved a lot,
but we got to that stage
where she was still
suffering some anxiety
and some depression.
And when we did her
qEEG brainwave testing,
we were able to
see that there were
two different parts of her
brain that needed treatment.
So we started first on
one part of the brain.
And in 30 sessions, which
we did in three months,
she had absolutely no
anxiety at the end of it.
We then went on
another three months
and worked on the other
part of the brain,
and the depression
completely lifted.
And this lady ended
up going back into uni
and studying naturopathy
and entering triathlons
and taking up personal
training and just
completely changing her life.
From someone who refused
to open the mail,
someone who refused
to even handwrite.
It was just an absolute
profound change in her system.
And for those people who do
need to go as far as changing
their brainwave patterns, we can
have life changing experiences
with them.
Same goes with
children with ADHD.
It's the problems with the
biochemistry in the beginning.
They're born sometimes
with strep infections.
You see this a lot where babies
are born with strep infections.
So as they're going
through school,
they're learning
in a foggy state,
as brain fog is a symptom
of one of those bacteria.
So while they're trying to
focus on school and learn,
they're not able to and
they don't know how to.
And they've never had a
normal functioning brain.
So you correct all of
those other things first
and then you go through
and you improve their focus
using the neurotherapy
and getting
their brainwave patterns right.
And in a very short period of
time, all of their problems
seem to lift.
And then it's permanent.
Neurotherapy is
permanent, which is
why it's such an amazing tool.
>> Great.
OK, so we just covered
the seventh step,
which is brainwave patterns.
Let's do a little bit of
a summary of these phases
and go through the
seven steps again.
>> Right, so three phases.
Remove the things that
are irritating you.
OK, so take away
those things first,
otherwise you're reliant
on Band-aiding them.
You don't want to do that.
So look at allergies.
Remove them out of your diet.
Eat clean.
Get rid of preservatives
and chemicals.
Get rid of things that are
toxic or overprocessed, so
things that can cause your
digestion to slow down.
Eat well.
Control your bacteria.
Remove the bacteria
that are harming you
and colonize the bacteria
that you require.
>> Which is the
high supplementation
of the probiotics and also
the antibiotic herbs, as well.
>> Yes, if you need those.
That's right, yes.
So that's removing the problems.
Then you need to
recover your system.
So you need to
restore everything
back up to where it
should be in the beginning
that you may have lost through
those things impacting you
previously.
So getting your nutrients
right, finding out
what you're deficient in,
boosting those levels up
to normal levels.
Eating a really nutritious
diet, getting your diet balance
right so that you're not
producing inflammation
from too much insulin.
So making sure that
everything that you're doing
is encouraging your growth.
So making sure that your stress
levels aren't overwhelming,
that you're getting
balance in life,
that you're
incorporating happiness.
That's the most important thing
is focusing on making sure
that what you do in life is
what you want to do in your life
and is your flow.
Some people sometimes
want to do things
that other people
want them to do.
But I encourage people to sit
down and write down the things
that they love and
that they enjoy
and factor them into
their week every week.
Don't wait till once a year.
Do it every day,
do it every week,
and get some sort of balance.
And figure out who
you are as a person
because you need those things
to keep your life balance so
that your stress
doesn't creep in again.
And that can
maintain your health.
So stress levels and
that will then help you
with your hormones, as well.
So keeping all of those things
right in that recovery section
and making sure that
you can maintain them.
And the last part is restoring
the brainwave patterns
and then maintaining your
health for the rest of your life
without having to rely on
supplementation or anything
else that you might have to
put in from an external source
to keep yourself where you are.
And recognize who you
are and what you require
and what food are right
for you as an individual.
Because every
person is different.
I've never seen two
allergy tests the same.
bacteria tests the same.
I've never seen blood tests the
same with levels of nutrients.
That's right.
So everyone is so unique.
Figure it out what
your weaknesses are.
And keep an eye on it and make
sure that if you recognize
those symptoms at all
any time in your life,
you go back to
looking at that again
and find out why did it happen.
What have I done,
what have I changed?
Let's go back to who
I am as an individual
and make sure that I'm
treating my body the way
that I've learned now is
the way I need to treat it.
And staying there, maintenance.
>> Fantastic.
Jodi, you're an
absolute champion.
Well done.
And your commitment to
helping people and helping
improve the life of thousands
of people through your practices
is incredible.
So thanks for sharing all
your knowledge with us today.
>> Thank you, and
you're welcome.
>> So it's James here
from "Food Matters."
And you've been listening
to seven steps to freedom
from anxiety,
depression, and ADHD
with Jodi Chapman, a health
scientist and naturopath.
And I really hope you
enjoyed today's program
and you've learned a lot and can
take some of these incredibly
invaluable steps that
she's been teaching
us to transform your own
health and those of the ones
that you love.